Blog - How the startup data stack evolves, what we've found (#5457)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/startup-data-stack.md

---

> title: "How the startup data stack evolves, what we’ve found"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "The "modern data stack" sucks"
```

showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Startups
tags:
 - Guides
 - Explainers
---

The goal of data is to help startups build a better product. To help them with this, startups use all sorts of tools, known as the startup data stack. 

To help you understand the startup data stack, and be better able to leverage it, this post will go over:
- What the startup data stack looks like from MVP to Series A
- Examples of tools used and the problems they solve
- PostHog's vision of the future for the startup data stack

This comes from working with hundreds of startups at all stages, conducting user interviews, researching the data stack landscape, and being part of the data stack ourselves.

## The MVP data stack

The goal of the MVP data stack is to get a signal that what you are building is working. Teams don’t want to spend time setting up complicated products this early, because their data needs aren’t large. They want something quick and proven to give them data like:

- Site visitors
- Leads, signups
- Product usage
- Revenue

To do this, they need:

> - Website and product analytics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Website and/or product analytics
```

> - Customer relationship manager (CRM)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A customer relationship manager (CRM)
```

- Revenue, payments, subscription tracking

![MVP](../images/blog/startup-data-stack/mvp.png)

To choose these products, they usually go with the "popular" choice, as they are [boring technologies](https://mcfunley.com/choose-boring-technology) that work for other people. The goal of the data stack at the MVP stage is to get basic data to find out if [what you are building is working](/blog/early-stage-analytics). Complicated solutions aren’t needed for this.

## The Seed stage data stack

Once the MVP has initial traction and you enter the Seed stage, the data needs increase and the tools become more complicated. This is because it is less obvious how to spend your time and resources. For example, some questions asked at this stage include:

- What features should we prioritize developing?
- How do we best serve our [ideal customer](/blog/creating-ideal-customer-profile)?
- How do we optimize our [conversion funnel](/tutorials/funnels)?
- What channels should we [be advertising on](/blog/dev-marketing-for-startups)?

> To answer these questions, teams pull data from a growing number of sources like product analytics, CRM, help desk, and ad platform. They also utilize more of the features of these sources, such as customer engagement and session recordings, generating more data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To answer these questions, teams pull data from a growing number of sources like product analytics, CRM, help desk, and ad platforms. They also utilize more of the features of these sources, such as customer engagement and session recordings, generating more data.
```

> To answer these questions, teams pull data from a growing number of sources like product analytics, CRM, help desk, and ad platforms. They also utilize more of the features of these sources, such as customer engagement and session recordings, generating more data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You'll need to pull data pull data from a growing number of sources to answer these questions – product analytics, CRM, help desk, ad platform, etc. You'll also utilize more of the features of these sources, such as customer engagement and session recordings, generating more data than before.
```

> Bringing all this data together and managing it often requires a [customer data platform](/docs/integrate/cdp) (CDP). CDPs collect the data from different sources and send it for use in destinations. For example, it might collect product data from PostHog, advertising data from Google, and revenue data from Stripe, and send it back to those same tools, a warehouse, or a business intelligence tool like Hex.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is where [customer data platforms](/docs/integrate/cdp) (CDP) like Segment come in. CDPs make it easier to bring data together by collecting it from different sources and sending it to various destinations. For example, a CDP might collect product data from PostHog, advertising data from Google, and revenue data from Stripe, and send it back to those same tools, a warehouse, or a business intelligence tool like Hex.
```

![Seed](../images/blog/startup-data-stack/seed.png)

The goal of the stack at this stage is to give insights into how the product and specific features are doing. Teams want to answer questions about the product and get basic KPI reporting. This enables them to make decisions about what to work on and measure progress towards goals.

> Moving from individual sources to a CDP makes gathering data faster, but starts to create a web of integrations and mainteinance. It is a challenge to know if data is accurate, luckily at this stage, it doesn't need to be. The Seed stage strikes the balance of giving engineers enough data to know what to prioritize with having plenty of time to build it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moving from individual sources to a CDP makes gathering data faster, but it's also where the rot begins as complexity and maintenance needs increase. Data accuracy problems proliferate at this stage, though for now this isn't a critical issue – engineers just need enough data to know what to prioritize.
```

## The Series A data stack

> Series A is where data begins to get serious, and by serious, I mean the startup makes someone responsible for owning the data stack. This person is often a head of data, data engineer, or backend engineer focused on data. They see their goal as empowering engineers with data to evaluate the success of what they build. To do this, they implement the so-called "modern data stack" which contains four tools:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Series A is where data begins to get serious. By serious, I mean (1) you need someone who is responsible for the data stack – normally a head of data, data engineer, or a backend engineer – and (2) accuracy is important.

Whomever gets the thankless task will see their goal as empowering engineers with data to evaluate the success of what they build. To do this, they implement the so-called "modern data stack" which contains four tools:
```

> Series A is where data begins to get serious, and by serious, I mean the startup makes someone responsible for owning the data stack. This person is often a head of data, data engineer, or backend engineer focused on data. They see their goal as empowering engineers with data to evaluate the success of what they build. To do this, they implement the "modern data stack" which contains four tools:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Series A is where data begins to get serious, and by serious, I mean the startup makes someone responsible for owning the data stack. This person is often a head of data, data engineer, or backend engineer focused on data. They see their goal as empowering engineers with data to evaluate the success of what they build. To do this, they implement the so-called "modern data stack" which contains four tools:
```

A bit of optional sass here.

> 1. A data warehouse to store all the data and act as a single source of truth. Options include Snowflake, BigQuery, and RedShift.
> 2. An ETL pipeline to extract data from different sources, transform it, and load it into the warehouse. Options include Fivetran, Integrate.io, and Airbyte.
> 3. A data transformation tool to model data, clean it up, and make it usable. dbt is basically the only option.
> 4. A business intelligence or visualization tool to get insights from the data you’ve collected. Options include Metabase, Looker, and Hex.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A data warehouse to store all the data and act as a single source of truth. Options include Snowflake, BigQuery, and RedShift.

2. An ETL pipeline to extract data from different sources, transform it, and load it into the warehouse. Options include Fivetran, Integrate.io, and Airbyte.

3. A data transformation tool to model data, clean it up, and make it usable. dbt is basically the only option.

4. A business intelligence or visualization tool to get insights from the data you’ve collected. Options include Metabase, Looker, and Hex.
```

Reviewer: Should we add reverse ETL at well... just to make it feel extra complicated? 🤔

Author: Data Orchestration and Data Governance are other options.

![Series A](../images/blog/startup-data-stack/series-a.png)

> Startups need this stack because managing and accessing individual sources of data becomes unsustainable. Tools like analytics and the CDP don't give complete insight into performance. Teams need a single source of truth, and the modern data stack gives them that. This creates trust in the data and greater accuracy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Startups need this stack because managing and accessing individual sources of data becomes unsustainable. Tools like analytics and the CDP don't give complete insight into performance. Teams need a reliable, single source of truth they trust, and they hope the modern data stack will give them that.
```

> The downside of this stage is that a gap opens between engineers and the data that is valuable to them. They are unable to "self-serve" and must learn the modern data stack tools or rely on the data team for insights. There are many reasons for this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But this also where things start to go seriously wrong. All this complexity creates a gap between engineers and the data that is valuable to them. They are unable to "self-serve" and must learn the modern data stack tools, or rely on the data team for insights. There are many reasons for this:
```

- The complexity of data and tools requires specialization.
- Data security, safety, and privacy requirements.
- Lack of knowledge of data available or how to use it.

> For example, engineers might need to write optimized SQL queries to understand customer feature usage. This requires an understanding of SQL, data availability, data structured, as well as access. These all create friction on what engineers want to do: build better products. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, engineers might need to write optimized SQL queries to understand customer feature usage. This requires an understanding of SQL, data availability, data structured, as well as access. All this does is slow down their work, blocking them shipping new features and improvements efficiently.
```

> For example, engineers might need to write optimized SQL queries to understand customer feature usage. This requires an understanding of SQL, data availability, data structured, as well as access. There all create friction on what engineers want to do: build better products. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, engineers might need to write optimized SQL queries to understand customer feature usage. This requires an understanding of SQL, data availability, data structured, as well as access. These all create friction on what engineers want to do: build better products. 
```

> ## PostHog’s vision for the future of the startup data stack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How we want to fix the "modern data stack"
```

> PostHog is not content with the "modern data stack." The gaps and complexity it creates limits the ability to [build successful products](/handbook/strategy/overview). To change this, we are improving how startups gather and analyze data at the earliest stages and consolidating more of the stack as they scale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you haven't figured it out already, we're not fans of this situation. To us, the "modern data stack" just creates costly barriers to building successful products. We want streamline how startups gather and analyze data at the earliest stages, consolidating more of the stack as they scale and delaying the need hire expensive heads of data and the like.
```

> Being a part of this evolution, we have thoughts on where PostHog fits into this. [Our mission](/handbook/strategy/overview) is to increase the number of successful products in the world, and we do this by helping engineers be better at product. This means helping them gather and analyze data at the earliest stage of their product, and integrating more of the parts of the startup data stack as they scale up.

Reviewer: I think we should frame this opening a bit more aggressively – i.e. make it "The problem with the 'modern data stack' and how we want to fix it" and open with a more opinionated take why the current norms are bad. All the right bits of information is here, it just feels a bit polite. I think we should be confident enough to say "this sucks" and here's a better way.

Author: got it I think

- Receive data from your app(s) and site(s) with our [SDKs](/docs/integrate?tab=sdks)
- Receive data from sources like [Stripe](/apps/stripe-connector), [Hubspot](/apps/hubspot-connector), [Intercom](/apps/intercom)
- Export to destinations such as [Snowflake](/apps/snowflake-export), [BigQuery](/apps/bigquery-export), or [RedShift](/apps/redshift-export)

Improving reliability, integrations, and UX is critical for success here. Being a CDP enables startups to have their data and tools in one place with PostHog. More data also improves the depth of insights engineers can get from PostHog without having to use other tools such as BI or visualization.

![PostHog CDP](../images/blog/startup-data-stack/posthog-cdp.png)

We are also figuring out what PostHog looks like as [a data warehouse](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/issues/14406) utilizing [ClickHouse](/docs/how-posthog-works/clickhouse). Data accuracy and reporting flexibility matter at scale. Being a warehouse enables PostHog to provide this to startups, and integrate it with tools they are already using PostHog for. With PostHog as a warehouse, startups don’t need to migrate or set up many of the modern data stack tools.

> PostHog wants to make it quick to evaluate whether products are working or not. The ability for engineers to find and analyze the metrics they want, along with tools like experiments and session recordings, is key to this. The modern data stack creates complexity and silos that make figuring out what to work on and what’s working difficult.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to make it easy to evaluate whether products are working or not. The ability for engineers to find and analyze the metrics they want, along with tools like experiments and session recordings, is key to this. The modern data stack creates complexity and silos that make figuring out what to work on and what’s working difficult.
```

> Integrating more of the parts of the startup data stack into PostHog enables engineers to continue to access the data, insights, and tools they need to build a great product. This current data stack evolution becomes large, complicated, and siloed quickly. Building an ideal data stack for engineers is what PostHog aims to do, and by doing so, we'll achieve our goal of more successful products in the world.

Reviewer: Maybe we can update this section to discuss what's been built at the offsite + HogQL. It feels a bit stronger now we've started building this stuff instead of just talking about it.

Author: I've rewritten this, didn't mention HogQL, but did talk about data warehousing (which is more relevant I think).

---
title: "How the startup data stack evolves, what we’ve found"
date: 2023-03-07
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Startups
tags:
 - Guides
 - Explainers
---

> The goal of the data is to help startups build a better product. To help them with this, startups use all sorts of tools, known as the startup data stack. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The goal of data is to help startups build a better product. To help them with this, startups use all sorts of tools, known as the startup data stack. 
```

To help you understand the startup data stack, and be better able leverage it, this post will go over:

> - What the startup data stack looks like from MVP to series B and beyond

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- What the startup data stack looks like from MVP to Series B and beyond
```

Bringing all this data together and managing it often requires a [customer data platform](/docs/integrate/cdp) (CDP). CDPs collect the data from different sources and send it for use in destinations. For example, it might collect product data from PostHog, advertising data from Google, and revenue data from Stripe, and send it back to those same tools, a warehouse, or a business intelligence tool like Hex.

![Seed](../images/blog/startup-data-stack/seed.png)

The goal of the stack at this stage is insights into how the product and specific features are doing. Teams want the ability to answer questions about the product and get basic KPI reporting. Although the team may not entirely trust the data coming in, it is good enough. It strikes the balance of giving engineers enough data to know what to prioritize while giving them plenty of time to build it.

## The series A data stack

Series A is where data begins to get serious, and by serious, I mean the startup makes someone responsible for owning the data stack. This person is often a head of data, data engineer, or backend engineer focused on data. They come in and implements the "modern data stack." This contains four tools:

> 1. A data warehouse stores all the data and act as a single source of truth. Options include Snowflake, BigQuery, and RedShift.

Reviewer 2: (Obv opinionated - feel free to disagree!)

> 1. A data warehouse stores all the data and act as a single source of truth. Options include Snowflake, BigQuery, and RedShift.

Author: The problem is that ClickHouse isn't really a warehouse. We are trying to make it a warehouse, but it isn't a warehouse by default.

2. An ETL pipeline to extract data from different sources, transform it, and load it into the warehouse. Options include Fivetran, Integrate.io, and Airbyte.
3. A data transformation tool to model data, clean it up, and make it usable. dbt is basically the only option.
4. A business intelligence or visualization tool to get insights from the data you’ve collected. Options include Metabase, Looker, and Hex.

![Series A](../images/blog/startup-data-stack/series-a.png)

Startups need this because managing and accessing individual sources of data becomes unsustainable. Teams need a single source of truth, and the modern data stack gives them that. This creates trust in the data and greater accuracy.

> The downside of this stage is that engineers start to get further away from the data important to them. They must learn the modern data stack tools or rely on the data team for insights. The analytics tools set up earlier become inaccurate, and are used less. This becomes a much larger issue in the next stage.

Reviewer 2: Another downside is integrating multiple tools together?

> ## The series B and beyond data stack

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The Series B and beyond data stack
```

With a data team led by the head of data squarely in place, their goal is to empower engineers to evaluate the success of what they are building. They attempt to use their data stack to make this happen.

It requires a lot of work because engineers are now further away from the actual data than ever. They are reliant on the data team to bridge this gap and create data sets and insights. Engineers are largely unable to "self-serve." There are many reasons for this:

- The complexity of data and tools requires specialization.
- Data security, safety, and privacy requirements.
- Lack of knowledge of data available or how to use it.

> As data sizes continue to grow, there are growing pains. For example, team members might need to write optimized SQL to access specific data they want. This is because everything revolves around the data warehouse. Everything adds, accesses, or transforms data from the warehouse.  The costs of hosting the warehouse as well as querying and processing data from it can become significant.

Author: I've reworked this section, but I think it should have been just "data", data sizes is a subset of data that is growing.

Tools set up earlier, such as product analytics or the CDP, are locked in and forgotten. These tools now only send data which eventually makes its way into the warehouse. If budget becomes a problem, these tools are likely the first ones to get cut.

> New tools, such as machine learning, are introduced to gain insights from "big data." The data team also grows to fulfill the needs of other teams for data. This does add maintenance, cost, and complexity. A larger data team is needed to manage the complexity at this scale.

Reviewer 2: Any specific product examples to give here? It was nice that you included this in previous sections.

Author: I've deleted this section now

To make this happen, we are improving the ability to use PostHog as a [customer data platform (CDP)](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/issues/13126). We have built the key functionality, such as the ability to:

- Receive data from your app(s) and site(s) with our [SDKs](/docs/integrate?tab=sdks)
- Receive data from sources like [Stripe](/apps/stripe-connector), [Hubspot](/apps/hubspot-connector), [Intercom](/apps/intercom)
- Export to destinations such as [Snowflake](/apps/snowflake-export), [BigQuery](/apps/bigquery-export), or [RedShift](/apps/redshift-export)

Improving reliability, integrations, and UX is critical for success here. Being a CDP enables startups to have more of their data and tools in one place with PostHog. More data also improves the depth of insights engineers can get from PostHog.

![PostHog CDP](../images/blog/startup-data-stack/posthog-cdp.png)

> We are also working on figuring out what PostHog would look like as [a data warehouse](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/issues/14406). Data accuracy and reporting flexibility matter at scale. Being a warehouse enables PostHog to provide this to startups, while still using the tools PostHog offers. With PostHog as a warehouse, startups don’t need to migrate or set up many of the modern data stack tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are also figuring out what PostHog would look like as [a data warehouse](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/issues/14406). Data accuracy and reporting flexibility matter at scale. Being a warehouse enables PostHog to provide this to startups, while still using the tools PostHog offers. With PostHog as a warehouse, startups don’t need to migrate or set up many of the modern data stack tools.
```

Reviewer 2: Mention ClickHouse here?

---
title: "The "modern data stack" sucks"
date: 2023-04-10
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Startups
tags:
 - Guides
 - Explainers
---

Every startup needs data to build a better product. This isn't up for debate. But, as we've found from working with hundreds of startups at all stages, the "startup data stack" can quickly devolve into a mess of tools slowing you down.

In this article, I'll explain how and why the startup data stack begins like this...

![MVP](../images/blog/startup-data-stack/mvp.png)

devolves into this...

> ![Series A](../images/blog/startup-data-stack/series-a.png)

Reviewer: Maybe we use your meme image here instead @ivanagas
